[Music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in today's
video we're going to look at Singletons and vexels
and the rank of a maxle we're going to Define what
the rank is and aim towards this rank theorem so
where we are so far we've defined things called
Singletons which are just lists of natural numbers
we have pixels which are lists of pairs of natural
numbers a vexel is that a multi set of Singletons
and a maxle is a multiset of pixels and we have
these types sing for Singleton pix for Pixel Vex
for vexel and Max for maxel so in this video
today we're going to associate vexels to the
rows and Columns of a maxle so of allowing us to
move more freely from two-dimensional objects to
onedimensional object and back and forth and uh
to make that a little bit easier we'll Define
multiplication of Singletons with pixels then
we're going to move towards the rank of a maxle
and this rank theorem so we want to talk about
rows and Columns of a maxle but we need to be
perhaps a little bit more precise about what
those words actually mean so recall that if we
have a maxle m and we multiply it on the left by
this item potent element eii and that's the maxle
that just has a single one in the i i position
then what we get is we get the Restriction of
M to the I row everything else is replaced with
zero and just the I row remains while on the other
hand if we multiply a maxel by an item poent like
this ejj on the right then we restrict the maxle
to the jth column the jth column stays where it
is but everything else is replaced with zero so
for example here is a maxle m we multiplied by
in this case e33 on the left and you can check
by doing the multiplication that what you get
is the maxle which is just the third row of the
original maxle and everything else is zeros on the
other hand if we take that same maxel and multiply
it on the right say by e22 there's e22 then what
we get is just the second column of the original
maxle and everything else is replaced with zeros
so this is certainly one interpret ation of what
we mean by the row and column of a maxel that you
know the third row of this maxel is that maxle
and that the second column of this maxle is that
maxle but we want to have also another possible
way of thinking about what the rows and Columns
of a maxle are what we are going to want to do
is to define the rows say the I row of a maxel
or the sh column of a maxle as a vexel in other
words as a one-dimensional object not as another
two-dimensional object so for example if this is
the maxle m we are going to want to define the
third row of this maxel as being that row there
but actually as a one-dimensional object in other
words as a vexel so that R sub3 of M is the vexel
7 4 25 23 no longer a maxel you can see it doesn't
look like Max because it's supported on a freeze
rather than on our screen and here is the second
column of M 32 4 5 but written out as a vexel also
column vexel with a freeze notation okay so why
would we want to do this well it's because we
want to look at the interaction between say rows
of a given maxle we might want to they add this
row to that row but we don't want to do this at
the level of pixels because then we have to keep
them separate this four represents a certain
number of pixels of the kind 2 three this two
represents a certain number of pixels of the kind
22 we can't add those without things just staying
separate but when we replace these things with
one dimensional vexels then we are in a position
of doing the usual arithmetic with vexels that's
what we want to do so to do this efficiently we
are going to define the product of a Singleton
and a pixel so we're going to extend our
multiplication of pixels which was really at the
heart of this entire arithmetic to an arithmetic
also involving Singleton together with pixels
in either order okay so how does this product
of Singleton and pixels work well it's very much
like the product of pixels so here is a Singleton
a and here's a pixel LM we're going to define the
product of these two things to be the Singleton
M if k equals l so if we have agreement between
these two natural numbers and the product of these
two things this Singleton with this pixel is this
Singleton and if this condition is not satisfied
we're going to have emptiness this rather novel
new kind of multiplication possibility that what
we get is not something with a name or a symbol
associated with it it's just blank on our page and
similarly when we multiply them in the opposite
order so if we have LM on the left and K on the
right then again we're going to get a Singleton
but it's going to be L this time if m equal K so
if these two agree we'll get L and blank otherwise
so for example the Singleton 3 * the pixel 24 is
blank because these two are not the same the
Singleton 2 * the pixel 2 4 is the Singleton 4
because this two and this two agree the Singleton
4 * 24 is blank because we have to have these two
agreeing the fact that these two agreeing doesn't
do anything for us on the other hand if we have
a Singleton on the right say 35 * 3 well that's
going to be blank because we require this and this
to be the same and 35 * 5 well these are the same
and we're going to get the Singleton three okay so
this multiplication of Singleton with pixels now
extends to a multiplication of vexels with maxel
because a vexel is just a multiset of Singletons
and a Max is just a multi set of pixels so if we
know how to mul multiply Singletons with pixels
then we can multiply M sets of Singletons with M
sets of pixels we do that in the standard way that
we're now getting used to that we just multiply
all possible products of the M set objects in the
first M set times the M set objects in the second
M set we look at all possible products and put
them all in a big box okay so we want to Define
this notion of a row or a column of a maxle but at
the fundamental level of multisets where the thing
actually is defined so we don't really want to
rely on our picture of our maxle with our screen
and those numbers and say well we're just going
to circle this row that's a visual or geometrical
interpretation right relies on our pictorial
understanding what we mean by a row so we want
to have something that's a little bit more precise
and here is going to be our official definition of
the I row of a maxle is or what the J column
of a maxel is and as I've said in the previous
slide we want the I row of a maxle to actually
be a vexel similarly for the J column so the
definition is going to rely on this particular
kind of special kind of vexel okay it's a vexel
that contains just a single Singleton namely the
Singleton list I okay so this here is a vexel with
one element and we're going to Define r i of M
the I throw of the maxle m to be EI * m so m is
a maxle and EI is a vexel how do we multiply
a vexel times a axel well I just told you we
multiply all the Singleton in this vexel with
all the pixels in this maxle take all possible
products and similarly the J column of M is going
to be the vexal CJ of M which is M * EJ the EJ on
the right hand side okay so let me illustrate this
with this example so here is a maxel m 1 2 3 1 0
and this is really the following multiset okay
it contains the pixel 1 one two copies of of the
pixel 1 3 three copies of the pixel 2 1 and one
copy of the pixel 22 so the second row let's look
at the second row which we sort of visually see is
310 how do we get at that well we take E2 * m E2
is this vexel right here it's the vexel containing
the single Singleton two okay so there's a vexel
and here is this maxel m just Rewritten again so
to multiply this m set with this m set we have
to multiply all the possible products between
the entries of this m set with the entries of
this m set now there's only one entry of this
m set namely the single Singleton 2 so we have
to multiply this Singleton 2 with this pixel
1 one and the Singleton 2 with this pixel 13
and so on all the way up to this single 2 *
this pixel 22 we have to put all the results
of those multiplications in a box okay so what
do we get when we multiply this Singleton 2 with
this pixel one one we get emptiness because
this two and this one do not agree similarly
this product is empty this product is empty
but this product is not empty because that
two and that two agree so the result is
the Singleton one similarly here get the
Singleton one here we get the Singleton
one and here we get the Singleton two
so R2 * m is this vexel it's a bunch of Singletons
so it's a vexel and what vexel is it well
there's three ones and there's one two so
in our freeze notation if we write it
as a row vexel it's 31 0 which is 310
so basically we're we're looking at all
the pixels involved in the max LM and
we're disregarding all of the ones that don't
start with two that's what we doing when we
multiplying with this two we disregarding all
the one the pixels that don't start with two
the ones that do start with two well we're
just essentially copying their second entry
that's what the multiplication does so really
we are just picking out that second row and
copying it but copying it as a Vel copying it as
a bunch of Singletons rather than as a bunch of
pixels okay what about say the third column
of this thing to get that we multiply the
maxel M with the vexel consisting of the
Singleton 3 e sub3 so here we have to do
all possible products between this Singleton
and these various pixels but this one time
this one is empty this one times this one
we get something because this second three
agrees with that three we get one here also
this second three agrees with that three so
we get one here there's no correspondence
emptiness emptiness emptiness emptiness we
just got a pair of ones which is when we write
it down as a vexel in column form is the vexel
2 or two Z it's the same thing so again what
we're doing when we're multiplying by this E3
is we're looking at all the pixels in this maxle
and disregarding all of the ones which don't have
a three as their second entry all the things
that are not having three as a second entry are
basically being ignored or killed the ones that do
have three as their second entry the result of the
multiplication is just to give us the Singleton
consisting of their first entry so basically
what we're doing is we we're copying that column
but replacing in the pixels with The Singletons
of just their first entries that ensures
that we get a vexel where we started with a
maxle okay so we see that we have to have a kind
of a appreciation for this data structure point of
view right we have to keep straight that we've
got lists and we got M sets and here we have
a m set containing a list we have to keep this in
mind the way we multiply M sets is very critical
so those of you who have taken a classical
linear algebra course will probably see this
approach as being overly fussy we're spending a
lot of time on the actual fundamental nature of
the underlying objects and that's of course
in keeping with this being a foundations of
mathematics series but you should also appreciate
that there's some sloppiness in the usual approach
where we Define things purely pictorially say
ah Matrix is something that looks like this and
a row is something that looks like this and
we're using our visual geometrical intuition
and allowing definitions which are just at
the pictorial level right there's something
imprecise about that and it's clear if you
try to compute in this framework and if you
get your computer to try to program something in
in this language then you have to think about how
you're going to translate all those pictorial
statements to actual precise statements that
a computer can understand so one way of
thinking about what we're doing here is
that it's providing some kind of framework
for a computer or a computer scientist or a
programmer to create a kind of viable computer
linear algebra it's a way of thinking about it
okay so once we have the rows of a maxel clearly
defined as vexels we can discuss linear relations
between them because once we're at the level
of vexels we can add vexels we can add vexels
because they're both M sets and we can always add
M sets and we can multiply M sets by scalars and
so we can take linear combinations of vexels
so that means we can take linear combinations
of rows of maxel which we couldn't so easily do
before in the purely maxle world so for example
here's a a maxel m okay and uh so let's refer to
its rows as R1 R2 R3 so R1 refers to this row but
as a vexel there's R2 as a vexel there's R3 as a
vexel there's R4 as a vexel okay so at the level
of vexels we can see that in this case R3 equal
R1 + R2 there's a relationship between this vexel
and this vexel and this vexel namely if you
add this one and this one then you get this
one and this fourth one is 4 * this
one minus 3 * this one so it's 4 R1 - 3
R2 now in order for this to work smoothly as
you can see we want to extend our coefficients
to allow integers to allow negative numbers so
that we can take more General linear combinations
not just always positive linear combinations
with natural number coefficients and in fact
we probably also want to extend things to have
rational coefficients then we can do standard
rational mathematics at the level of these
coefficients and this gives us the flexibility of
usual linear algebra approach where we are allowed
to take rather General linear combinations of
things now it's not entirely necessary to do this
so we could rephrase these linear relations if we
really had to by removing the negative signs
and removing all fractions we could multiply
through by common denominators and we could bring
the negatives over here for example to this side
here and restate these relations purely in terms
of positive natural number linear combinations
but it's more natural I think especially for
someone who's taken linear algebra course to
think about it this way so what we're going to
be doing is thinking about a maxle as being a
an array like this or an M set of pixels just as
before the definition of pixel hasn't changed the
pixel is still a a list of natural numbers but
the multiplicities of those pixels is allowed to
be integer valued or possibly even rational valued
okay so in this case here we see that we can now
talk meaningfully about relations between rows
or we could also talk about relationships between
columns same thing where we regard the rows now
as actual vexels where the linear combinations
of vexels really is allowed because those are
just m sets of Singletons okay so we want to now
introduce the idea of rank of a axle and we'll do
that by having a preliminary discussion about row
Rank and column Rank and shortly we'll see that
those two Notions actually agree but it's not
obvious at first that they agree so the row rank
of a maxle m is defined to be the minimum number
of vexels needed to express each row of M as a
linear combination of the vexels so we're looking
for a collection or a set of vexels which is as
small as possible but still has the property that
every row of our maxle is some linear combination
of the vexels that we have in our little
list and a similar definition
of column rank minimum number
of vexels needed to express each column
of M as a linear combination so here is
an example here is Max M and I claim
that the row rank of M is actually two
so that means we have to find a set of vexels
with two vexels so that everything here is a
linear combination of those two and I claim that
these two vexels will work in fact I can just take
the first row and the second row I don't have to
take actually rows of the maxle itself I'm free to
take any vexels that I like but I do require that
every row of the ma is some linear combination of
the vexels that I've chosen so why does this work
well because this first row is obviously a linear
combination just it's that one the second row is
obviously a linear combination it's just that one
and this third row 665 is 2 * the first row plus
the second row well you can see that 2 * 1 + 4 is
6 2 * 3 is 6 and 2 * 2 + 1 1 is five so this is a
legitimate linear combination expressing the third
row as a linear combination of these two so these
two alone suffice to span the rows of the maxel we
use that uh word that is that every row here is a
linear combination of these vexels and this is the
minimum number required we can't do it with just
one vexel we dropped one of these then that would
be enough so the minimum is two that means that
the row rank of this maxel is two okay so here we
come now to a pretty hefty theorem this is really
a major theorem in linear algebra but it's now
stated in this language of maxel but both the the
statement and the proof are pretty standard uh in
linear algebra okay the statement is that for
any maxel M the row rank of m equals the column
rank of M the minimum number of vexels needed
to span the rows equals the minimum number of
vexels required to span The Columns so here is a
a sketch of the argument and I'm going to sort use
an example to illustrate what's going on I think
it makes it clear so suppose that V1 V2 up to VK
are a minimal number of vexels which span the rows
of a maxle m so we're given a maxel m and we found
one way or another K vexels V1 through VK which
span the rows of this maxle m we can use these
to obtain a factoring of M of a particular kind so
it turns out that we can then write M as a product
of two maxel where the second maxle is obtained
by taking these K vexels that we have and putting
them as the first K rows of a maxel and the other
component in this product on the left hand side
is a similar kind of thing where we have
K vexels written as columns say U1 U2 up
to UK where it turns out that U
1 U2 and UK span The Columns of
M so given a minimal number of vels which
span the rows of a maxle m we can cook up this
factorization of M and it's called a full rank
factorization and it's really the existence of
this factorization that allows us to say something
about having uh vexels which span the rows
gives us columns which span The Columns so that's
what happens if these things here span the rows
then these ones here these columns will span The
Columns of M okay so I want to illustrate this
and why it's true with an example all right this
argument really does rely on our understanding
of the geometry of maxal multiplication so let's
have a look at this very illustrative example here
so here's a maxle m okay and if we look at its
rows let's say we're interested in the rows and
we're asking well what's sort of the minimal
number of vexels required to span those rows
well one thing would be to just start looking at
the rows themselves and asking how many of them
do we need in order to span all of the rows
well a little bit of thought shows that these
first two rows will suffice so if we just look at
these first two rows this third row is a linear
combination of these two rows namely it's this row
plus this row and this row here is four * this one
minus 3 * this one right we've seen this relation
before so we we've already observed that these
two are spanning rows of this maxle now we can use
that fact to get this factorization so this is the
sort of key point is how we go from from the fact
that these are spanning rows to this factorization
so let's just look at this product where on the
right hand side we just put the maxel with just
these rows here 0 1 2 0 0 1 I'll dispense with
the zeros outside okay now I claim that we had
this product okay so let me remind you the way the
maximum multiplication works if we're interested
in this first row here okay the first row of
the product is obtained by taking this times
this so how do we get this thing we get this times
this plus this times this and then how do we get
the entry here we get this times this plus this
times this how do we get the entry here we get
this times this plus this times this so what we're
doing is we're taking a linear combination of rows
where the coefficients are given by these numbers
here so this is a kind of important observation to
get the first row of a what we're doing is we're
taking linear combinations of the right hand rows
with the coefficients determined by the first row
of the left hand side okay so this thing here is
telling us that 1 time the first row plus 0 * the
second row gives us the first row here this second
thing here is telling us that 0 * the first row
plus 1 * the second row is this row here that's
true the third one is telling us that one time
this first row plus 1 * the second row is this
row here the third row here which is correct and
this one here is telling us that four times the
first row minus 3 * the second row gives us this
row here right so these numbers that are appearing
here are the coefficients required to express
these various rows here as linear combinations
of these rows here please make sure that you go
through the multiplication and convince yourself
of that so in this case here the spanning set are
these vexels 012 and 0 01 those are the vexels
that we need to express all of these as linear
combinations and we've been able to create this uh
factorization from knowing that let's have a look
at the same Max M but choose a different set of
vexels which span the rows right the set
of vexels which spans the rows is highly
non-unique there's a lot of choice in particular
we could choose 0 1 0 and 0 0 1 now these are not
rows of the original axle that doesn't matter
all that we require is that each of the rows
here is a linear combination of these rows and
that no fewer rows suffice so let's check that
so so the way the multiplication works this
row here is 1 * this row plus 2 * that row we
express that with the one and the two here so
1 * this plus 2 * that 1 plus this * 2 * that
1 plus this * 2 * that we're taking 1 * this row
plus two * this row to give us that one at the
second row level this 0 01 is 0 times this row
plus one time this row at the third row we're
getting 0 1 3 this is 1 * this one plus 3 * this
one it's particularly simple here because of the
nature of these and 045 is 4 * this one + 5
* this one so again what we're seeing is that
we've got our set of spanning vexels forming
the right hand Matrix in this factorization and
the left hand Matrix is just recording the
coefficients record re ired to express the
various rows as linear combinations of these
in particular note that the number of columns
here is always exactly equal to the number of
rows here if there are K rows here then there
are going to be K columns here because we need
to say how many of the first row we're going to
need how many of the second row we're going to
need how many of the third row we're going to
need all the way down to how many of the K row
that we're going to need for each one of these
rows so the factorization always has the property
that the number of rows here
equals the number of columns
here okay so so the argument is that once we have
a minimal number of vexels that span the rows we
can cook up such a factorization and then the
observation is that we can interchange the rows
and the columns in our thinking right things are
symmetrical with respect to rows and columns so
when we look at a product like this we can say
ah this is a linear combination of these rows
with these as the coefficients that's true but an
equally valid interpretation is to say aha this is
a linear combination of these columns with these
as the coefficients so let's illustrate that so
this first column here is obtained as a linear
combination of this column and this column it's
0 * this First Column plus 0 * the second column
the second column here is here's a second column
here it's 1 * this column plus 0 * this column and
this third column is 0 * this column plus 1 * this
column May it's even even clearer up here if we
look up at this thing here and we look at this
third column here right this third column what
this is telling us here is that this third column
is two times this First Column plus 1 times this
second column so you take two times this First
Column and add one times this column you're going
to get this column here so there's a symmetry
this kind of factorization can be interpreted as
we're taking a linear combination of these rows
with coefficients determined by what's happening
on these rows here here another way of thinking
about it is this is a linear combination of The
Columns of the left hand Matrix with coefficients
determined by what's happening in The Columns
of the right hand Matrix okay and it's this
symmetry which is the key to things so what is
this saying is that once we have a factorization
like this then we know that we can express the
columns here as linear combinations of these
columns and we know that there are at most
K columns here by the construction so that's
telling us that the column rank of M is always
less than or equal to the row rank of M if we've
found K vectors or vexels which span the
rows then we found at most K vexels which
span The Columns namely The Columns of the
leftand Matrix in this kind of factorization
okay now by symmetry everything is completely
symmetrical if we've just proven that the
column rank of M is always less than equal
to the row rank of M we just interchanged
the argument then the row rank of M is always
less than or equal to the column rank of M and
so these two numbers must actually agree and
we get this common number which is the rank of
M okay so it's a great exercise to um see how this
works in practice so as an exercise for you write
down some maxel and find factorizations like
this so find actual minimal row aels that span
the rows write down a corresponding factorization
and convince yourself that you're also getting at
the same time a minimal set of column vectors or
column vexils which span the columns we're going
to be uh returning to this this an important
little factorization and the notion of rank
is all important in linear algebra colors uh many
aspects of the subject so we are going to be going
a lot further in this direction of maxel and so
on and sort of building up linear algebra but I
want to give you a little bit of a break from that
and talk just for a few lectures about something
else which we are going to have to address in
this discussion at some point okay so we've
been talking a lot about the importance of finite
concrete write downable expressions you all know
that I'm very much against sort of waffley
statements about all the natural numbers or
infinite sets here or infinite sequences here and
although I've talked earlier in this foundational
series about the difficulty with very very big
numbers and making phrases about uh infinite
sets I want to talk a little bit more about that
really Hammer home the importance of thinking
clearly about how we represent numbers and what
actually is possible and what is not possible so
we're going to have a little bit of a disruptive
look at large numbers uh in our next video with
a view of explaining why we want to stick very
clearly in this finite concrete write downable
framework that we're proposing okay that's going
to be kind of a central uh theme of of ours and
I think it's going to be a central principle in
21st century mathematics too right we're going
to have to give up on the fairy tale of infinite
this and infinite that and one of the best ways of
really seeing why we need to do this is to see the
difficulties that are there in the natural number
realm once we get to biggish numbers okay so we're
going to look at some reasonably seriously big
numbers next time and you're going to start to see
some of the problematic aspects of arithmetic with
big numbers I hope you'll join me for that
I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening
[Music]